---
layout:     post
title:      "These weeks in PlanetKit #5: bits and bobs"
date:       2016-11-18
summary:    Finding structure, preparing for movement, and learning a lot from Yasteroids.
tags:       rust planetkit specs slog
published:  false
---

PlanetKit is a project aimed at creating a toolkit for making interactive virtual worlds. I'm writing it in the Rust programming language, which I'm finding delightful to work with, and a great fit for the task.

It's been nearly a month since I last posted here, so I'm going to drop the pretense of it being a weekly blog. The main reason it's been so long is that I've been chipping away at a few unglamorous bits and pieces. So, alas, no pretty screenshots this week.


## What have I been up to?

- Split draw code out into its own module.
- Un-bundle meshes from PSOs so I can share the PSOs. (TODO: why?)
- Separate mesh per chunk.
- Add basic logging using slog. (TODO: screenshot of output, link to "days in rust" blog post)
- turned it into a library
- token start towards "simple" version of things
- implement specs for rendering and input
- learn from yasteroids: send encoders between render and main. link to yasteroids.
- start of celldweller -- not the band -- (lead into what's next)


## What's next?

TODO

Next up I'm going to start building a simple game on top of this. Yes, that's what I said next week. I also said it'd take a little while to get started, because of the need to explore a few things. Well, I've explored them, now. Let's go!

Stay tuned for more hexagonal fun!

As always, the source for everything I'm talking about here is up in the [_planetkit_ repository on GitHub](https://github.com/jeffparsons/planetkit).
